---
layout: post
title: If you can remain calm, you just don't have all the facts.
created: 1148905377
categories: []
---
<p>Maybe you have heard the quote, maybe you haven't. Well, here is another example of <a title="We call it life" href="http://streams.cei.org/">how scary our world really is</a>. Gives me the creeps. And while I'm at it: <a title="Du bist Deutschland" href="http://www.du-bist-deutschland.de">Du bist Deutschland</a>. Also scary, in a different way. And as if that wasn't enough, the <a title="Cicero" href="http://www.cicero.de/">cicero</a> magazine recently had a story about the new friendship between the bush clan and the clinton clan - reminds me of this piece in the brilliant &quot;Hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy&quot; (pretext: a spaceship crashes into Harrods, opens its hatchway and a robot emerges)</p><blockquote><p>&ldquo;I come in peace,&rdquo; it said, adding after a long moment of further grinding, &ldquo;take me to your Lizard.&rdquo;</p><p>(Ford, the well-traveled space-adventurer then explains to Arthur, the human:)<br /><br />&hellip;&rdquo;It comes from a very ancient democracy, you see&hellip;&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;You mean, it comes from a world of lizards?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Ford, who by this time was a little more rational and coherent than he had been, having finally had the coffee forced down him, &ldquo;nothing so simple. Nothing anything like so straightforward. On its world, the people are people. The leaders are lizards. The people hate the lizards and the lizards rule the people.&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;Odd,&rdquo; said Arthur, &ldquo;I though you said it was a democracy.&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;I did,&rdquo; said Ford. &ldquo;It is.&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;So,&rdquo; said Arthur, hoping he wasn&rsquo;t sounding ridiculously obtuse, &ldquo;why don&rsquo;t the people get rid of the lizards?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;It honestly doesn&rsquo;t occur to them,&rdquo; said Ford. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve all got the vote so they all pretty much assume that the government they&rsquo;ve voted in more or less approximates to the government they want.&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;You mean they actually vote for the lizards?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;Oh yes,&rdquo; said Ford with a shrug, &ldquo;of course.&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;But,&rdquo; said Arthur, going for the big one again, &ldquo;why?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;Because if they didn&rsquo;t vote for a lizard,&rdquo; said Ford, &ldquo;the wrong lizard might get in. Got any gin?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;What?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;I said,&rdquo; said Ford, with an increasing air of urgency creeping into his voice, &ldquo;have you got any gin?&rdquo;<br /><br />&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll look. Tell me about the lizards.&rdquo;<br /></p><p>Ford shrugged again.<br /><br />&ldquo;Some people say that the lizards are the best thing that ever happened to them,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re completely wrong of course, completely and utterly wrong, but someone&rsquo;s got to say it.&rdquo; <br /></p></blockquote><p>&nbsp;(Kudos to CraigsirK for typing the passage (<a title="Craigsirk" href="http://www.craigsirk.com/">for use in this post</a>) )</p>
