---
layout: post
title: Some minor remarks on the credit crisis
created: 1225548714
categories: []
---
<p>So, here we are again, facing an economic downturn. Admittedly, a potentially rather serious one, but nonetheless, not really anything new.</p><p>Marx was spot on when he spoke about the &quot;Krisenhaftigkeit des Kapitalismus&quot;. Interstingly though, in recent years most people seemed to believe either that he was wrong and we have reached a point of constant growth or that Marx was right and surely at some point the Crisis would come again and this time take Capitalism down with it.</p><p>As a software developer one has to think a lot about systems as a whole and how to organize them. Viewed from this point of view, I&nbsp;think capitalism is a pretty reasonable system precisely because it is cyclical. Yes, this means that people loose their jobs once in a while and that share prices, as well as all other forms of investment, can and will fall in value from time to time. And this is a good thing. Not for some esoteric reasons, but simply because most efficient systems work this way.</p><p>There seems to be this prejudice that a more &quot;natural&quot; economic system would provide stable wealth to everyone. Everybody would be able to keep his job. Since when is it a good thing that gigantic industries that should be declining are kept alive? Like the automobile industry that will probably get lots of tax breaks now so that they can continue producing cars that are horribly inefficient and mostly owned personally instead of beeing mostly shared?</p><p>It seems we are still afraid of change and therefore long for stability. Capitalism is not stable - by design. It's main function is to efficiently allocate resources. This main function has to be controlled by governments so that economic cylces are smoothed a little and resource usage (or waste) properly billed. But basically, what we see now is not a sign that capitalism is a bad system. It is a sign that it is an efficient system that is adjusting again.</p>
