# My perspective on climate change

In the last few months climate change was discussed with renewed vigor in the media and on social networks. I think more and more people realize that we have a problem but I think a lot of the current focus is misguided. In particular, I think the personal consumption lifestyle choices and moral question of per capita and historic consumption are given too much weight. The only thing that matters going forward is our gross total greenhouse gas emissions and this is what we have to effectively reduce.

I worry that with the current focus on appeals to individuals to reduce meat consumption and air travel the populations of rich nations are not going to be willing to pay for more effective methods. Just consider the backlash Macron's government experienced after raising petrol prices. Now of course it's great if individuals reduce their carbon footprint - but in the bigger picture the number of people I consider to be willing and able to do such things is far too little.

Today, China emits more greenhouse gases than the US and Europe combined. India is rapidly building out coal power plants. As their wealth and living standards improve, many not-yet rich countries will need energy and construction on a large scale. If we concentrate on getting a few more Europeans to eat a little less meat and wait for current market forces to replace fossil fuels then we will not be able to keep global warming to manageable levels.

There are three main areas that I think are neglected in current debate that I think could have great impact:
* aligning market mechanisms better with mitigating climate change
* invest more in research, development and deployment of relevant technologies
* designing clever strategies for international technology transfer and economic incentives for poorer countries that are either already emitting large amounts of greenhouse gases or are projected to do so in the near future.

Let me flesh out each of these in turn.

Capitalism is an amazing tool if its negative sides can be contained. A carbon tax in the rich countries would be a great start to align normal market incentives of lowering prices with reducing greenhouse gases. It would mean that areas where switching to clean sources of energy are cheapest would do so first, out of pure monetary considerations. Such a carbon tax would in the details be tricky to get right (how do you account for imports of goods? Can you price conservation of e.g. forests? Can you avoid a gigantic increase in beaurocracy?), but even an imperfect tax would already be a good step. It should probably start at a level somewhat higher petrol taxes (and replacing those) and then subsequently increasing to increase the incentives. To make such a tax politically viable and avoid broad opposition, the windfall from such a tax should be directly sent to citizens as quarterly or yearly flat per capita cash payments (as opposed to lowering income taxes or similar). This way companies and individuals could each try to lower their particular fossil fuel consumption to pay less tax and the proceeds would be distributed equally (thus being very regressive in effect since a few hundred euro a year are a much bigger benefit for a poor family than for a rich one).

Investment in research and development of climate change mitigations should be a high priority for rich countries. This should not just focus on electricity production where big wins are probably too far off to be of much direct use (e.g. with nuclear fusion). Instead more attention shoud be paid to "the other 50%" of greenhouse gas emissions besides electricity and transport: agriculture and construction. If we could half the emissions of producing concrete we would do more for the planet than if we got rid of all air traffic.

Additionally, we need to start to seriously look into carbon capture and storage and geo engineering. I am not particularly fond of this group of technologies, but since the IPCC projections for a 2 degree scenario all mandate net negative emissions at some point this century I don't see how we should get there without geo engineering. We will just not be able to bring our carbon emissions to 0 or close to it we will need such solutions to be developed.

We should also try to be clever in how we push technologies that are getting to the cusp of viability by designing prices for commercialization or subsidizing buying of such solutions. Germany half-knowingly did something like this in the 2000s with their subsidy for solar power - it created a solar industry (first in Germany, then in China) which lead to the rapid tumbling of prices of production. Because of this we now have solar energy that is so cheap that in many places it is cheaper than coal for new power plants. (But at the same time we of course have German consumers fed up with high prices that make it hard to get off the dirty lignite coal).

Finally, none of this will matter too much if we can't influence greenhouse gas emissions where the trajectory points to strong grow in energy production, construction and meat consumption. At the moment this is mostly China which is responsible for about a quarter of all greenhouse gas emissions (this includes production of consumer goods that are then exported and should arguably accounted for at the consumers, but the clear majority is for domestic construction and consumption). India's need for energy rises constantly as well, as will that of many countries in Africa.

The only sensible goal is to reduce overall total emissions, and so I think a big focus of our problem solving should center around what we could do help China wane off coal and implement other greenhouse gas emission reduction techniques. Here I think we should get creative with trade deal incentives. If the EU could strike a deal with China that would be highly salubrious for it but hinge on the condition of replacing (or refraining to build) coal power with clean alternatives, then this might be a tremendously effective way of reducing emissions. Additionally, such a deal could provide a blueprint for other countries as well - the greener you build your electricity grid etc, the more we open our markets for you.

Maybe trade deals are not the best incentive, but I think they are point towards a direction that we should focus on to help bring big emitters onto a better path.

Overall, I doubt we will be able to keep global temperature from rising somewhat above 2 degrees celcius vs the pre-industrial levels. To stay below 2 degrees, we only have around 800 Gigatons of CO2 (or equivalent greenhouse gases) left, and we are currently putting around 40 Gigatons into the athmosphere every year. So we could go for another 20 years with current emissions and then would have to cut to 0 immediately for the rest of the century (imagine what cutting to 0 means - 0 emissions from agriculture, construction, electricity, transport). Or we could reduce our emissions every year by one gigaton for 40 years and arrive at 0 greenhouse gas emissions in 2060. Even with moderate carbon capture and storage I don't think that this is very realistic given the energy and construction needs a lot of the not-yet-rich countries will have in the 21st century. So I think we will not be able to make the 2 degree target, but it is worth pointing out that 2.5 degree would be much, much better than 4 degree warming by 2100. And the earlier we are able to get mitigations in place the higher the savings will be. So I think we should do what we can and aim for the big targets, like coal electricity production and putting a lot of reasarch and prize money into low emission carbon steel and concrete.

So what are we to do? I think the primary focus should be to push politics and public discourse to concentrate on effective means to reduce total global emissions. In the rich countries we should make sure to do our own part (looking at you, German lignite plants) - but the best leverage for the overal picture will be to unleash the power of technology and market incentives while making sure that they help the currently growing countries the most. If you are a politician  I think this would be a worthy aim (that might sell better to voters as well). If you are a jouralist, I think it would be great to use the limited airtime the topic of global warming has to focus minds on the big payoffs, not on small individual contributions. If you are neither, think about where you can influence public discourse in other ways. The situation is bad, but we have the power to avert terrible outcomes for the wider ecosystems and furture generations by a large amount. Let's try to do start doing the right thing - and keep working on it for the next few decades.
