# My perspective on climate change

In the last few months climate change was discussed with renewed vigor in the media and on social networks. I think more and more people realize that we have a problem but I think a lot of the current focus is not directed at the pragmatic goal of mitigating climate change as far as possible. To this end, the only thing that matters going forward is our gross total greenhouse gas emissions and this is what we have to effectively reduce. Unfortunately, a lot of public discussion focuses on personal consumption lifestyle choices and moral arguments. Public attention is limited and I think it is therefore important to try and guide it to exert strong pressure towards three main areas: an emission tax or carbon tax to align profit incentives with emissions reductions; more research, development and bootstrapping of technologies to reduce emissions - especially in the neglected agricultural and steel/cement producing sectors; and a creative diplomatic effort to create strong (trade) incentives for the big emerging economies to refrain from deploying coal for electricity production.

The rest of this blog post will elaborate on this argument. To frame the discussion, I think it is useful to recall a few important numbers. The scientific opinion of the IPCC is that we should try to constraint global temperature rise by 2100 to ideally 1.5 or at least 2 degree celcius versus pre-industrial average global temperature. The emissions our species has produced so far have locked in an increase of a bit more than 1 degree already, so we would end up with just below 1.5 degree even if we stopped any and all greenhouse gas emissions today. A greenhouse gas emission budget can be calculated which expresses how many Gigatons of CO2 equivalent we can still put into the athmosphere to stay within a given temperature target. For 1.5 degree, we have about 400 Gigatons left. We currenly emit around 45 Gigatons CO2 equivalent (around 35 Gigatons CO2 as well as Methane from agriculture that is equivalent to another roughly 10 Gigatons of CO2 in it's effect). If you do the math, this means we can go on emitting at the current level for around 9 years and then have to go to 0 net emissions immediately. Emissions can be offset if we find ways to remove additional CO2 from the athmosphere - e.g. by planting additional trees (that are not burnt later in their life) or by increasing plankton growth or via some other technical solutions (though of such there are currently no economic, large scale schemes on the horizon). But which ever way you turn it, the 1.5 degree target looks pretty unrealistic at this point.

To stay within 2 degrees warming, we have about another 800 Gigatons left. This gives us another 18 years or so at current emission rates after which we have to suddenly switch to 0 emissions, or, preferably of course, a somewhat smoother curve to reduce our global emissions as soon as possible. Unfortunately, the trend curve of emissions goes the other way.

It is worth noting that the higher the temperature increase will end up the worse the repercussions for our ecosystems and our living standards will be. Thus, even if we slightly miss the 2 degree target, this would be a much better than the ~3.5-4 degree increase we are currently on a trajectory towards.

If we look at emissions by region we see that absolute emissions have started to slowly decline in the last few years in both Europe and the US, although at a very slow pace. At the same time, the emissions of especially China rose very quickly as it becomes wealthier and has big construction and energy production needs. Climate diplomacy should therefore be an important part of the solution, but let's first look at the things the rich countries (such as Germany, where I live) can do by themselves.

Capitalism is an amazing tool if its negative sides can be contained (though containment is of course a constant political struggle). A carbon tax in the rich countries would be a great start to aligning the normal market incentives of increasing profits with the goal of reducing greenhouse gases. It would mean that areas where switching to clean sources of energy are cheapest would do so first, out of pure monetary considerations.

For such a tax we could either aim for a simpler carbon tax that would apply to fossil fuels and other forms on energy based on their CO2 contributions and would be paid for by consumers when the fuel is bought. Alternatively we could be more ambitious and try to introduce an emission tax that covers not only fossil fuels but also the consumption of products; so for example beef would be taxed since cows contribute to greenhouse gas emissions by burping methane and thus make meat alternatives more competitive; industrial products would get a similar additional price pressure, so investing in low carbon steel would become something economically desirable for companies. The details of such a more wide ranging tax would be tricky to get right since they would have to cover imports of goods and there remain some tough questions (e.g. how to make this WTO trade rule compliant; how to price conservation of forests that does not result in shipped products but is worth a lot of saved emissions; and how to avoid creating a gigantic bureaucracy).

Even an imperfect tax would already be a good step. It should probably start at a level somewhat higher petrol taxes (and replacing those) and then subsequently increase year on year to increase the incentives to avoid or replace emissions. For a few years now many international oil companies have used an internal carbon price since they anticipate something like this coming and need to decide on big investments with a lifetime of serveral decades. The price they use is usually around the 50 USD/ton of CO2. Modern cars emit a ton of CO2 for every roughly 10.000 kilometers they drive, so an initial level of taxation at current petrol prices would be higher than that already in many European countries (CALCULATION HERE). Coincidentally, the amount of CO2 emitted when travelling by airplane in modern passengers airplanes at close to capacity is roughly similar for the distance travelled - so traveling 1000 km via plane produces roughly the same emissions as travelling the same distance alone in a car. So a plane ticket for a return flight of a distance of 1000 km would incur additional initial taxes of 10 dollars in this setup.

To make such a tax politically viable and avoid broad opposition, the windfall from such a tax should be directly sent to citizens as quarterly or yearly flat per capita cash payments (as opposed to lowering income taxes or similar). This way companies and individuals could each try to lower their particular fossil fuel consumption to pay less tax and the proceeds would be distributed equally, thus being very regressive in effect since a few hundred euro a year are a much bigger benefit for a poor family than for a rich one. If a carbon tax would be levied at 40 Euro / ton, the tax income for Germany given it's current emissions would be ..., so every resident would be paid around 400 Euro per year. Inequality is a big concern when it comes to energy taxes since often rural populations are both poorer and have higher energy consumption needs per capita. However, since the the tax would be collected from industry as well as individuals but the proceeds be paid out to individuals only, the immediate additional expenses from fuel and heating should be offset by the payouts for most people (indirectly the costs for energy intensive products would also rise but I think that such effects would not be as visible to consumers)

There are many details to discuss, but I think something along the lines above would create a moderate but wide-reaching incentive for companies and individuals to reduce their carbon footprint simply out of economic interest and as such should be a short term political goal within rich countries. Vested interests in energy intensive export industry will rally against this on the grounds that it will disadvantage them versus their international competitors. Here I would argue that this is not a strong enough reason against such a tax given the overal benefits. Additionally, by pioneering low carbon technologies they will be in a much better position in the medium term when other countries follow suit.


The second area I think we should focus on more is investment in research and development of climate change mitigation technology. Rich countries should lead the way here and aggressively share such technologies with poorer countries. This should not just focus on electricity production where big wins are probably too far off to be of much direct use (e.g. with nuclear fusion). Instead more attention should be paid to "the other 40%" of greenhouse gas emissions besides electricity and transport: agriculture and construction. If we could half the emissions of producing concrete and steel we would do more for the planet than if we got rid of all air traffic. There are promising signs that adding a little bit of certain algea to the feed of cattle dratically reduces their Methane emissions - these are the things we should try to validate and get into the wild quickly.

Additionally, we need to start to seriously look into carbon capture and storage and geo engineering. I am not particularly fond of this group of technologies, but since the IPCC projections for a 2 degree scenario all mandate net negative emissions at some point this century I don't see how we should get there without a strong CC&S and maybe some geo engineering. We will just not be able to bring our carbon emissions to 0 or close to it without these technologies. There's only that many trees you can plant and make sure they will not be burnt and we will need additional ways of reducing CO2.

We should also try to be clever in how we push technologies that are getting to the cusp of viability by designing competitions with big prizes for commercialization (Similar to what the US military arm DARPA did in the early 2010s for self driving vehicles). Another thing we should do more effectivly is subsidizing buying of carbon mitigating technolgies that are just not competetive yet. Germany half-knowingly did something like this in the 2000s with their subsidy for solar power - it created a solar industry (first in Germany, then in China) which led to the rapid tumbling of prices of production. Because of this we now have solar energy that is so cheap that in many places it is cheaper than coal for new power plants. (But at the same time we of course have German consumers fed up with high prices that make it hard to get off the dirty lignite coal - getting the balance right in theses things is hard).


Before we get to my third point it is maybe worth elaborating a bit on why I think that the current public discourse is doing effective global warming mitigation a disservice. What I currently see is a lot of focus put on using moral arguments to get individuals to voluntarily reduce their consumption patterns, specifically by reducing flying and reducing their meat consumption/becoming vegetarian. Now both of these things are of course laudable and I certainly don't want to keep anyone from doing that. But I think that in public discourse there is a limited public attention capital that can be spent on any given subject. In the end, if a certain percentage of people able and willing to fly less and eat less meat in the rich countries but otherwise nothing much changes we will miss the 2 degree target by a wide, wide margin. So we should focus on effective reduction of absolute, global CO2 emissions - in the end, this is the only variable that counts for the temperature increase of our planet. Individuals in the rich world voluntarily flying a bit less out of guilt doesn't do much if the number of gigatons of CO2 we put out globally does not go down. I fear that the current communication might lead more to capitulation in front of the problem instead of an appetite to attack it vigorously with effective tools via political means.

In a similar vein, I think that the focus on moral arguments based on per capita emissions or historic emissions tends to focus us on an inefficient solution space. Yes, rich nations got rich by consuming vast amounts of carbon based energy. Yes, the energy use per capita is a lot higher in the US than in India. But high historic emissions in the rich world can't translate into emerging economies now using similar amounts of fossil fuels. The moral dimension of the argument should translate into a strong research effort the results of which should be shared freely, thus helping other countries walk a better way while still becoming rich. Add to this that when we try to "pick the low-hanging fruits" first when it comes to reducing CO2 emissions, much of that will be found in the worlds coal power stations, many of which are in operation (or currently being built) in emerging economies.

This brings me to my third point: climate diplomacy. Today, China emits more greenhouse gases than the US and Europe combined. India is rapidly building out coal power plants. As their wealth and living standards improve, many not-yet rich countries will need energy and construction on a large scale (some of the emissions attributed to China are for products that are exported to rich countries but this is only about ~13% of China's emissions). In absolute terms, coming up with good solutions to reduce these emissions is of paramount importance.

Here I think we should get creative with trade deal incentives. If the EU could strike a deal with China that would be highly salubrious for it but hinge on the condition of replacing (or refraining to build) coal power with clean alternatives, then this might be a tremendously effective way of reducing emissions. Additionally, such a deal could provide a blueprint for other countries as well - the greener you build your electricity grid etc, the more we open our markets for you. A part of this could be that "low emission beef" could be exempt from import duties.

A historic blueprint we should use as inspiration is the Marshall plan. Europe, the US and Japan should think about ways of using direct investment and similar tools on a significant scale to create clean energy in emerging economies. The trick here will be to create good incentive structures and modes of governance (we don't want this to become a form of eco-colonialism after all), but this again might have very high returns in terms of emissions reductions per dollar invested.



So what are we to do as individuals? I think the primary focus should be to push politics and public discourse to concentrate on effective means to reduce total global emissions. In the rich countries we should make sure to do our own part and not look hypocrite (looking at you, German lignite plants) - but the best leverage for the overall picture will be to unleash the power of technology and market incentives while making sure that they help the currently growing countries the most. If you are a politician (or know one), try shifting the position of your party towards effective means of greenhouse gas emission reduction. If you are a journalist (or know one), I think it would be great to use the limited airtime the topic of global warming has to focus minds on the big payoffs, not on small individual contributions. If you are neither, think about where you can influence public discourse in other ways.

Finally, I think it's important that global warming becomes a major point in making voting decisions - basically a party without a clear agenda to effectively reduce greenhouse gases should stop being a viable option for as many people as possible. It is my hope that this will play out at least in Europe more and more and create competition on this topic between parties. Where currently the various green parties are often seen as the only ones even aiming to do anything in this space there is a big underexplored political space for liberal or center-conservative parties to try to put forward more pragmatic and economically attractive alternative to the often very ideological party programs of the greens. I would love to see conservative parties giving greens a hard time on global warming topics for mainstream voters.

This problem is not easy to solve - our governance structures and decision horizons are ill aligned with the scale and duration of the problem of global warming. The situation is bad, but we have the power to avert terrible outcomes for the wider ecosystems and future generations by a large amount.  Let's try to do start doing the right thing - and keep working on it for the next few decades.
